---
title: 'Nonlinear Systems: An Introduction'
date: 2025-01-28
permalink: /posts/2025/01/blog-post-3/
tags:
  - control
  - math
  - robotics
---

This is a detailed blog on Analysis and Control of Nonlinear Systems. The objective is to present the fundamental results of modern nonlinear control and recent developments in nonlinear control.

Note: This blog is heavily referred from the text book *Applied Nonlinear Control by Slotine, Li*

Nonlinear Control
======
Nonlinear control deals with the analysis and design of nonlinear control systems. 

* In **analysis**, a nonlinear control system is assumed to have been designed and we wish to determine the characteristics of the system's behaviour.
* In **design**, we are given a nonlinear plant and some specifications of closed loop behaviour, our task is to construct a controller so that the closed loop system meets the desired characteristics.

## Types of Nonlinearities

## Common Nonlinear System Behaviours

### 1) Multiple Equilibrium Points
  Nonlinear Systems frequently have more than one equilibrium points. Equilibrium points are where the system can stay forever without moving. The convergence or the stability of the system to one of the equilibrium points depends on where it starts i.e the initial condition.

### 2) Limit Cycles
  Nonlinear systems can display oscillations of fixed amplitude and fixed period without external excitation. These oscillations are called **Limit Cycles** (or self-excited oscillations).

  Some properties of Limit Cycles are
  1. The amplitude of limit cycles are independent of the initial conditions.
  2. Limit cycles are not easily affected by parameter changes.

### 3) Bifurcations
  As the parameter of nonlinear dynamical system are changed, the stability of the equilibrium point can change, so do the number of equilibrium points. Values at which the qualitative nature of the system's motion changes are known as **Bifurcation value** (or critical value).

### 4) Chaos
  For stable linear systems, small difference in input can only cause small difference in output. But, Nonlinear systems display a phenomenon called **Chaos** in which the system output is extremely sensitive to initial conditions. The essential feature of chaos is the unpredictability of the system output.

  Chaos occur mostly in *strongly* nonlinear system. This means, for a given system, if the initial condition or the external input cause the system to operate in a highly nonlinear region, it increases the chances for generating chaos.

  **Note**: Chaos cannot occur in linear systems !!!

Analytical tools to study Nonlinear Systems
======

## Phase Plane Analysis